
Page
1
of 13
1
FTMBA 200S: Data and Decisions
Syllabus Fall A 2026
(Aug 24th to Oct 7th 2026)
Instructor:
Professor Matthew Backus
Office: F685 Haas Faculty Building
Email: backus@berkeley.edu
Web: https://haas.berkeley.edu/faculty/matthew-backus/
Office Hours: Weds 11am-12pm (no appointment, walk-in)
Graduate Student Instructor:
Shreya Chandra
E-mail: shreya.chandra@berkeley.edu
Office Hours: Wednesdays 4:00pm-6:00pm, in F489 (Haas Faculty Building; walk-in, no
appointment)
The Course
Course Objectives:
Data and Decisions is not a typical statistics course. We move quickly, covering during
seven weeks everything from statistical tests and confidence intervals all the way through
interpretation and inference in multiple regression models. Along the way, we emphasize
deep ideas rather than memorizing formulas, discussing, for example, how smart
companies use experiments to increase profits and the business and quantitative
implications of big data and AI.
Class Schedule: Lecture Axe: Mondays & Wednesdays, 9am-11am. N570 Chou
Hall, starting August 24th.
Lecture Oski: Mondays & Wednesdays, 2pm-4pm. N570 Chou
Hall, starting August 24th.
GSI Review Section: Friday 9am-10:30am. N570 Chou Hall,
starting August 28th.
Both lecture and review section begin promptly 10 minutes after
the hour.
2
Course Materials: (1) The suggested text is Statistics for Business: Decision Making
and Analysis, 3rd Edition, by Robert Stine and Dean Foster,
Pearson, January 2017. This is available at the Cal Store, but feel
free to get the book wherever and in whatever form you would
like. For example, the book is available for rent or eTextbook
digital rental from Amazon. The reading of the textbook is
optional; students are strongly encouraged to read the assigned
chapters before class.
(2) A statistical software package. Data and Decisions requires
data work on statistical software. We allow for multiple tools. One
is Stata, an advanced statistical software package. Free Stata
student licenses were negotiated for MBA students. Another easy
one to use is Microsoft Excel, which you can use for all in-class
exercises, but it is less specific to data analysis. Be sure you have
Excel and that you have installed the Analysis Toolpak. To
activate the Toolpak, from Excel Options go to “Add-Ins" to
activate. If you are using a Mac, please be sure to use Microsoft
Office for Mac which is available for free for all Haas students.
You can also use R, SAS, SPSS, Matlab or Python. We provide
support for Stata, Excel, R. However, if you already have any
statistical package you prefer, feel free to use that.
(3) Access to an advanced AI model interface, such as Gemini,
ChatGPT, Claude, or others of equivalent capacity. We use these
for data analysis and human-machine complemented statistical
decisions.
(4) www.dlab.berkeley.edu Data Lab for supplementary and
completely optional coding/training sessions (for those of you who
want to learn python, etc.). Great resource.
(5) Zoom will only be used for in-class practice (students will log
in and share the statistical analysis on their machines). We will
use: https://berkeley.zoom.us/my/matthew.backus
Classroom Norms
Class attendance is required. Be in your seats ready to begin the discussion when class
starts. Because of the way our classrooms are designed, it is disruptive when class
members arrive late. Please be courteous to your fellow classmates and arrive on time.
We will take a brief five-minute break at the one-hour mark to minimize disruptions
during lecture.
3
The FTMBA classroom norms were developed in collaboration with previous FTMBA
students and the program office. As a reminder they are: (1) inclusive, (2) supportive, (3)
prompt and present, and (4) learning-focused tech.
The class is in-person. It is not possible to live-stream either the lecture or discussion
section. Use the Program Office form to report absences from class. (When you
anticipate being absent, please complete this form). Notice that essentially only deaths in
the family or serious illness are excusable.
Note on Cold-Calling
In order to ensure that I have an accurate sense of how the class as a whole understands
the material—and to make sure that all students participate and feel included—I use cold-
calling (or rather, “warm calling”). Before each class starts, I will use software to select
random samples of students (random sampling with replacement), who will be called
upon in class.
These are not interrogations; they are friendly conversations designed to allow me to
sample from the class and to understand whether the material that we are discussing is
correctly assimilated by the students. We learn together this way. Furthermore, the
benefits of random sampling will soon be evident to students of Data and Decisions.
Fire/Smoke/Power Outage
In the event that we are not able to hold classes on campus due to an emergency campus
shutdown, we will move to a remote format (see Zoom details).
Electronics Policy
No cellphones may be used in class at any time. Laptops will be used for in-class
exercises and for the final exam. Laptops and tablets are not allowed in class except
during designated times and for data analysis only.
Midterm:
There is no midterm exam.
Deliverables
Group deliverable data projects take the place of the midterm. Details on the group
project are noted in the assignments and will be also presented in class. Students will
work with their Haas study groups and have one week to complete each project.
Final Exam:
4
The final exam will be 2 hours long, on Tuesday October 13th, 9-11am. You will be
allowed a single 8 ½ x 11 sheet of paper (double-sided) with notes (any font, any spacing
allowed).
Grading:
10% Attendance. Recorded using iClickers. Students can miss 1 class without
penalty. Attendance is tracked starting from Lecture 2.
50% Group Projects. The simple average of the take-home deliverables
determines this score.
40% Final Exam. The final exam is in person. You need to take this test in
order to pass the course.
These three components will produce your numerical score for Data and Decisions. The
letter grade of each student will then be determined based on an academic curve, fit on
the numerical scores of the entire class and set by your instructor.
GSI Sections
The Friday discussion sections will be run by the GSI. Review sections are very, very
strongly recommended and should be considered as important as lectures. The GSI will
also organize an extra section (a review session) during the week of the final exam. If
there are particular topics you want the GSI to cover, please let them know by
Wednesday 5pm. Note: there will be no review section on Friday, September 11th, due to
the make-up class that day.
Communication
We will use bCourses for circulating PowerPoint slides, cases, quizzes from previous
years, and other discussion materials. These materials are intellectual property of the
Haas School of Business so please do not repost.
You should also post questions on logistics and course material there. I will keep
everything you need on bCourses.
Honor Code
Even if not explicitly stated on each test, the honor code is always in effect. As members
of the UC-Berkeley community, our expectation is that you will adhere rigorously to the
UC-Berkeley Honor Code. Anyone caught cheating on any test in this course will receive
a failing grade in the course and will also be reported to the University Center for Student
Conduct. For further information see: www.asuc.org/honorcode/.
AI Policy
5
Students in this course are allowed to use generative AI tools provided for certain
assignments and may use other generative AI tools unless specifically prohibited for a
given assignment. This approach aims to foster AI literacy and to explore how AI tools
can enhance learning, research, and creative processes. Even when using AI, students are
still responsible for ensuring the accuracy, originality, and integrity of their submitted
work. For certain assignments (e.g., in-class exams, specific writing tasks), the use of AI
tools may be strictly prohibited. Specifically, the use of AI is strictly forbidden on the
Final Exam. Any use of AI during the Final Exam will trigger an automatic Failing
Grade on the course.
Any permitted use of AI tools must be disclosed in accordance with the following
guidelines.
Acknowledging AI use
You must acknowledge all instances where you use a generative AI tool in this course.
This should be done within the assignment itself or in an appendix to the assignment. For
each instance, you must specify:
AI System Used: (e.g., ChatGPT, Gemini, Claude, etc., including version if known)
Specific Use of the Tool: (e.g., brainstorming, outlining, grammar check, code debugging
assistance, etc.)
Prompting Strategy/Key Prompts: Describe your approach to prompting the AI and, if
applicable, include key examples of prompts that were central to generating the output
you used.
Outputs Received: The relevant output generated by the AI tool, clearly indicating which
parts were used or adapted.
Example Acknowledgement:
"I used [AI System] (e.g., ChatGPT 4.0) to [specific use, e.g., brainstorm ideas for topic
X]. My prompting strategy involved [brief description of strategy, e.g., iterative
refinement], and a key prompt was: '[insert key prompt here]'. The output included [brief
description of relevant output, e.g., three potential angles for argument X], which I then
developed further in my own words in paragraph Y."
Re-Grading
Requests for re-grades must be submitted in writing within 72 hours of the test/exam
being returned. This typed petition should clearly document the specific issue you have
with the grading and should be turned in with the relevant assignment. Please do not
write on the test/exam, but rather on a separate document. We do not re-grade individual
questions. Thus, a re-grade request will prompt a regrade of the entire test/exam and your
score may go down after a regrade.
Other Help and Resources
6
Accommodation services through the Disabled Students Program Office are available. If
you need accommodation in this class, please contact DSP (not me). A letter will then be
sent to me informing me of the specific accommodation (e.g. additional time on exams,
etc.).
7
Course Outline/Reading List
# Date Topic Going Deeper Deadlines
1 Mon Aug 24 Course Introduction Chapter 1-12
review
2 Wed Aug 26 Samples & Surveys Chapter 13 Deliverable #1 Distributed
3 Mon Aug 31 Sampling Variation &
Sampling Bias
4 Wed Sep 2 Control Limits & Type
I/II Error
Chapter 14,
Sec. 1 and 2
Deliverable #1 Due
Deliverable #2 Distributed
5 Wed Sep 9 Confidence Intervals &
Hypothesis Testing
Chapters 15, 16
6 Fri Sep 11 Experiments, A/B
testing, & Randomized
Controlled Trials
Chapters 17,
Sec. 1, 2, 3, 5
Deliverable #2 Due
7 Mon Sep 14 Linear Patterns Chapter 19
8 Wed Sep 16 The Regression Model Chapters 21, 23 Deliverable #3 Distributed
9 Mon Sep 21 The Regression Model
Part 2
10 Wed Sep 23 Building Regression
Models
Chapter 24 Deliverable #3 Due
Deliverable #4 Distributed
11 Mon Sep 28 Categorical Models Chapter 25
12 Wed Sep 30 Predictive Analytics Deliverable #4 Due
Deliverable #5 Distributed
13 Mon Oct 5 Machine Learning/
AI/Preparation for Data
Analytics
14 Wed Oct 7 Wrap Up & Review Deliverable #5 Due
Tue Oct 13,
9-11am
Final Exam
8
FTMBA 200S: Supplementary Articles and Other Readings
Lectures 2-3: Sampling and Population:
The Economist, November 5th 2020. “Polls—and our forecast model—overestimated
support for Joe Biden” https://www.economist.com/united-states/2020/11/05/polls-and-
our-forecast-model-overestimated-support-for-joe-biden
Joe Pinsker. Wall Street Journal, August 6th 2025. "Government Data Is Under Fire, but It
Makes the World Go ‘Round" https://www.wsj.com/personal-finance/bureau-labor-
statistics-data-impact-uses-fd2b00f7?mod=article_inline
The Economist, June 22nd 2023. “Telling it how it isn’t: As response rates decline, the
risk of polling errors rises” https://www.economist.com/united-states/2023/06/22/as-
response-rates-decline-the-risk-of-polling-errors-rises
Text as Data
Financial Times, May 3rd 2026. “Hedge funds seek an edge by using AI’s speed”
https://www.ft.com/content/0feb5743-ecf3-48f3-8425-faabea4b6f86?syn-25a6b1a6=1
Lecture 4: Type I and Type II Errors
Deepa Seetharaman, Wall Street Journal, August 4th, 2024 “There’s a Tool to Catch
Students Cheating With ChatGPT. OpenAI Hasn’t Released It”
https://www.wsj.com/tech/ai/openai-tool-chatgpt-cheating-writing-135b755a
Brody Jane E., The New York Times, July 13th, 2020, updated Aug. 7th, 2020. “The Case
for Smarter Coronavirus Testing”
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/13/well/live/coronavirus-smart-testing.html
Lecture 5: Prediction and Uncertainty:
The Wall Street Journal, June 10th, 2020. “The Fed’s Work Is Far From Done”
https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-feds-work-is-far-from-done-
11591821969?st=fraquc1dwob0766
Jason Furman. Project Syndicate, January 17th, 2022. “Why Did Almost Nobody See
Inflation Coming?” https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/2021-us-inflation-
forecasting-errors-economic-models-by-jason-furman-2022-01
9
The Economist, 2024. “How The Economist’s presidential forecast works”
https://www.economist.com/interactive/us-2024-election/prediction-
model/president/how-this-works
Aschwanden, Christie November 26th, 2019. Wired Magazine “We're All 'P-Hacking'
Now” https://www.wired.com/story/were-all-p-hacking-now/
Lectures 7-11: Applications of Regression Analysis
The Economist, March 10th, 2024. “New numbers show falling standards in American
high schools” https://www.economist.com/united-states/2024/03/10/new-numbers-show-
falling-standards-in-american-high-schools
The Economist, February 5th 2022. “How we forecast the French Election”
https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/how-we-forecast-the-french-
election/21807484
Nate Silver’s Model Methodology 2024 https://www.natesilver.net/p/model-
methodology-2024
The Wall Street Journal, March 5th, 2020. “The Power of Personal Metrics At Work”
https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-power-of-personal-metrics-at-work-11583361008
Bojinov, Iavor I., Albert Chen, and Min Liu. "The Importance of Being Causal." Harvard
Data Science Review 2.3 (July 30, 2020).
https://hdsr.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/wjhth9tr/release/1
The Economist, April 21st 2026 “AI is the new Oracle of Delphi. That’s bad news”
https://www.economist.com/by-invitation/2026/04/21/ai-is-the-new-oracle-of-delphi-
thats-bad-news
Lecture 11: Data and the Gender Gap:
The Wall Street Journal, July 31st, 2020. “The Women’s Suffrage Movement and the
Gender Gap Are Fixtures of U.S. Elections. It Didn’t Start Out That Way”
https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-womens-suffrage-movement-and-the-gender-gap-
arefixtures-of-u-s-elections-it-didnt-start-out-that-way-11596209355
Cheng, Eugenia The Wall Street Journal, August 6th, 2020. “What the Numbers Say
About Gender Differences” https://www.wsj.com/articles/what-the-numbers-say-about-
gender-differences-11596752225?st=auob03a8dxg19b1
Adamy, Janet and Paul Overberg. The Wall Street Journal, May 17th, 2016. “Women in
Elite Jobs Face Stubborn Pay Gap” https://www.wsj.com/articles/women-in-elite-jobs-
face-stubborn-pay-gap-1463502938
10
Harvard Business Review, November 3rd, 2020. “How to Identify — and Fix — Pay
Inequality at Your Company” https://hbr.org/2020/11/how-to-identify-and-fix-pay-
inequality-at-your-company
11
Lecture 13: Machine Learning, AI and Data Science
Melissa Heikkilä, Financial Times July 19th 2025. “AI groups spend to replace low-cost
‘data labellers’ with high-paid experts” https://www.ft.com/content/e17647f0-4c3b-49b4-
a031-b56158bbb3b8
The Wall Street Journal, July 31st, 2021. “Why Artificial intelligence Isn’t Intelligent”
https://www.wsj.com/articles/why-artificial-intelligence-isnt-intelligent-11627704050
Doordash Inc. 2025 “Causal Machine Learning for Promotions: Industry Evidence and
Applications” https://causal-machine-learning.github.io/kdd2025-
workshop/papers/16.pdf
Financial Times, July 15th 2026. “How AI is reshaping supply chains”
https://www.ft.com/content/3f773f4b-efaf-4bb4-953a-ff19863b2973
The Economist, January 26th 2026 “Why AI won’t wipe out white-collar jobs”
https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2026/01/26/why-ai-wont-wipe-out-
white-collar-jobs
Privacy and Recording Notice
To improve student optionality and the student learning experience, we may use live
streaming and recording technology in our Haas MBA courses and events. Use of these
technologies allow:
• Students to participate in core and elective courses and Haas campus events (such
as Dean’s Speaker Series events) remotely
• Students to watch video recordings of classes and events they could not attend in
person
• Prospective students to observe first hand our unique Haas culture via live stream
as they decide whether to apply to the MBA Programs or accept an offer of
admission
• Students to view course recordings for courses they are not enrolled in to help
them decide on electives to enroll in or as an enrichment opportunity
• Haas Alumni to audit Haas electives as part of the Haas lifelong learning
proposition
• Members of the Haas Community to engage or watch important BerkeleyHaas
Events such as Dean Speaker Series events, lectures sponsored by Centers and
Institutes, and ceremonies such as Commencement
In recognition of these practices, the MBA Programs at Haas, events and class lectures
may be live streamed via the internet and/or recorded.
Live stream viewing of courses is available to:
• Students registered in the course
• Current UC Berkeley students (who may or may not be registered in the particular
course)
12
• Haas alumni auditing courses, approved pursuant to UC Berkeley’s auditing
policy
• Prospective students approved in advance
• Faculty/staff as appropriate under UC Berkeley policy
Recordings of courses are available for viewing to:
• Students registered in the course
• Current UC Berkeley students (who may or may not be registered in the particular
course)
• Haas alumni auditing courses, approved pursuant to UC Berkeley’s auditing
policy
• Prospective students approved in advance
• Faculty/staff as appropriate under UC Berkeley policy
I understand that, as a result, my personally identifiable information may be disclosed to
individuals with access to the livestream and/or recordings, as described above. The
information may include: my name, my course enrollment and recordings of my
participation in academic and extracurricular activities.
I understand that my participation in events and class lectures will be recorded, and may
involve the disclosure of personally identifiable information as described above.
By enrolling in, or attending, any MBA courses, I acknowledge and consent to the
terms of this Privacy and Recording Notice and provide my authorization to the
practices and activities described above. This authorization will remain in effect until
my graduation or departure from the MBA Program, whichever comes first.
I understand that if I am concerned about my privacy in live-streamed or recorded
courses or events, I can maximize my privacy by engaging in one or more of the
following practices:
• Modifying my display name to show only my first name and last initial or first
name only
• Using muted video to remain engaged and dialing in to the class to use audio by
phone so that when I ask a question, my name and face will not be shown on the
recording
• Engaging via chat room rather than by asking questions by audio/video channels
To discuss questions or concerns about the Privacy and Recording Notice, contact the
appropriate MBA Program Office.
For more information on privacy practices I can use during recorded or live streamed
courses or events, contact UC Berkeley’s Student Technology Services
The Federal Education Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) is a law that governs access to
educational information and records. Information specific to UC Berkeley is maintained
by the Office of the Registrar and can be found here: FERPA (Privacy Disclosure).
13
For more information regarding UC Berkeley’s privacy policies, contact the Privacy
Office.
